## 1.1 Architecture of the CPU  


### 1.1.1 parts of a CPU:

#### The Control Unit (CU):
* It's in overall control of the CPU.
* Controls data flowing in/out of the CPU (Internally
(Registers, ALU and Cache), Externally
(RAM, HDD and input and output
devices).
* Mainly, it executes program instructions.

#### Accumulator:
* Stores the intermediate results of calculations in the ALU.

#### The Arithmetic Logic Unit (ALU):
* It's where the CPU performs the arithmetic and logic operations (eg: AND, OR & NOT).
* **Every** task that your computer carries out is completed here.
* *Extra:* It holds the accumulator.

#### The Cache:
* Cache is a very fast, small piece of memory inside the CPU.
* It's faster then RAM *but slower then the registers (extra).*
* The Cache stores regularly used data,
for quick access. The cache is checked
first when data is requested, if not the
data is taken from the RAM or even secondary storage.

#### Memory Address Register (MAR):
* Holds any memory address about to be used by the CPU.
* eg, data or instruction.

#### Memory Data Register (MDR):
* Holds the actual data or instruction. This may have been fetched from memory, or be waiting to be written to memory.

#### Program counter (PC):
* Holds the memory address of the instruction for each cycle

### The Fetch/Decode/Execute cycle (the cycle of data):
##### Fetch:
1. Copy memory address from the program counter to the MAR.
2. Copy the instruction stored in the MAR address to the MDR.
3. Increment (increase) the program counter to point to the address of the next instruction, ready for the next cycle
##### Decode:
1. The instruction in the MDR is decode by the CU. The CU may then prepare for the next step (eg, by loading values into the MAR or MDR).
##### Execute:
1. The instruction is performed. This could load data from memory, write data to memory, do a calculation or logic operation (using the ALU), change the address in the PC or halt the program.
##### The cycle then repeats.

### CPU Performance:
#### 3 Factors:
* Clock speed
* Core count
* Cache size

##### Clock speed:
* This is the speed at which the CPU can carry out instructions.
* It's measured in cycles per second and on cycle per second is know as **1hz**.
* Clock speeds are usually measured in GHz, 1 GHz is 1 billion hz.
* Higher clock speed = more cycles per second = faster CPU

##### Core count:
* The more cores a CPU has, the more simultaneous processes it can perform.  
* Software needs to be programmed in a way to take advantage of them (multithreading).  
* For eg, a dual core processor can fetch and execute 2 times the instructions in the same time it would take a single core processor to do so.

##### Cache size:
* If the cache size is bigger, more frequently used instructions can be stored for quick access.
* If the cache is too big, it can slow the CPU down as it looks through cache to find the right thing (like looking through a big box compared to a smaller box).
* However, generally, bigger = better 😏
