## 1.3 Computer networks, connections and protocols

## Lan:  

### Describe a LAN Network:
Computers connected in a network at the same geological. Connected with Ethernet/UTP/twisted pair/copper/fibre optic or wirelessly.

### Advantages/Disadvantages of a LAN network over a standalone computer:
* **Advantage:** It can be used to easily share files locally like in a work or an office enviroment.
* **Disadvantage:** If the server with the files on goes offline, then noone can access their files until it is online once more.

### Factors that can effect the performance of a network:
* **Number of users:** The more users that try to access a network, the more "umpfff" is needed to sustain that network.
* **Error rate:** If the network has alot of errors in normal operation, then it can reduce the performance as stuff doesn't work and users can try to "fix" the issue themselves, causing more strain. For example, spam refreshing the page.
* **Transmission media:** The greater the number of devices connected to a network, the more important the choice of transmission medium becomes. *[source](https://www.bbc.co.uk/bitesize/guides/zvspfcw/revision/8)*
* **Bandwidth:** More bandwith is needed as more infomation is sent to and from the network. For example, having more users on a network would require a higher bandwith so not to bring the network speed down to a crawl.
* **Latency:** The latency (ping) that the users have to the network can be crucial for good performance for the end-users. If they have a high latency they are waiting on the data sending to and from the server to them. Having the server as close as possible to the end users brings the smallest latency.

## Different (networking) models:

### Client/Server model:
The server:
 * Controls access and security to one shared file store.
 * Manages access to the internet/
 * Manages printing jobs (if needed)
 * Provides email services (if needed)
 * Runs a backup of data.  

The clients:
 * Make requests to the server for data, connections and services.

### Peer-to-peer model:
* A peer is equal to all the other peers - they serve their own files to each other.
* Each peer is responsible for its own security.
* Each peer is responsible for its own backup solultions
* Peers usally have their own peripherals.
    
    __Disadvantages of a P2P model:__

    * The network is less secure.
    * Users need to manage their own backups.
    * It's difficult to maintain a well-ordered file store/naming system.


## Hardware (switches and routers):

### Differences between switches and routers:

* A switch routers traffic on a local area network. This would be the thing you have if you need multiple devices connected to one ethernet cable. [example](http://cdn.mrrazamataz.ga/data/mynetworkswitch.jpg)
* A router routes traffic on a local area network. This is the "magic internet box" you have in your house.
* A switch uses network interface card (NIC)/MAC addresses.
* A router uses internet protocol (IP) addresses.

### Advantages of using fibre optic cable instead of twisted copper cable:

* Faster network speeds.  
* More reliable over long distances.  

## Domains 'n' that:

### How the URL `mrrazamataz.ga` is resolved to an IP address:

* A request is send to a domain name server (DNS).  
* It looks up the requested URL in the index.  
* It returns the IP address for the server that is running the website.   
* *Extra: a software like Apache or Nginx will most likely be running on the webserver, which allows multiple websites to be hosted on one machine. In basic terms, the software looks at the requested URL and serves the correct page. This is how different websites can have the same IP address.*  

### What type of IP adress is `192.168.0.1`
* It's an IPv4 address.  
* It's also an internal local IP for systems, no website or router has that IP.  


## Network structure types and protocols:

### Star:

* Is easier to setup and maintain.
* The central switch allows many devices to access the server simultaneously.
    
    __Advantages of a Star network:__

    * If a device fails or a cable is disconnected, the rest of the network is unaffected.
    * Simple to add more devices to the network.
    * Better performance then other setups, data goes straight there to the central device/switch.


    __Disadvantages of a Star network:__

    * If its a wired star, every device needs a cable to connect to the central switch/server. This can be expesive.
    * If there is a problem with the switch/server, the whole network is affected.



### Mesh:
* All devices are connected together.
* Decentralised; network devices are either directly or indirectly connected to every other one without the need for one central switch/server.
* They send the data along the fastest route from one device to another. Like covid.
* Is more resistant to a hardware fault.
    
    __Advantages of a Mesh network:__

    * No single point of failure, data can go along another route.


    __Disadvantages of a Mesh network:__

    * If its a wired mesh, it is also expensive, as lots of cables are needed.

### Wireless technologies:

* WiFi (2.4ghz and 5ghz)
* Bluetooth

### 