## 1.6 Ethics n that  

### Ethics:  

#### Data security:
Personal data is precious and needs to be kept safe. Unfortunately, there are people that attempt to hack systems in order to gain access to other people's data. Social media accounts, phone mailboxes and networks that computers connect to are all prone to hacking.

Some people may also use malware to obtain data. Recent times have seen the increased use of a type of malware known as ransomware. People who write ransomware do it to extort money from unsuspecting users. Once the ransomware infects a computer it encrypts data on it, denying users access unless a ransom is paid.

#### Ensuring public safety:
Ensuring public safety is paramount. As new technologies are introduced, they bring safety concerns.

For example, driverless cars may soon be on the roads in the UK. The designers of driverless cars have not only had to ensure the safety of passengers, but also of other drivers and pedestrians. Ethics apply here as a situation may occur where the car's software has to decide who has safety priority, the passengers or other road users.

### Computer Legislation:

#### Data Protection Act (2018):
* Gives rights to subjects.
* Lets data subjects the right to see, amend and delete the personal data an organisation holds about them.
* Exceptions: for eg, an organisation don't have to disclose any data that could affect national security, or the outcome of a court case.
##### 6 principles:
* Data should be kept safe and secure.
* Data must only be used in fair, lawful and transparent ways.
* Data must only be used for the specified purpose.
* Data should be adequate, relevant and not excessive for the specified use.
* Data must be accurate and kept up to date.
* Data should not be kept longer than necessary.

#### Copyright, Designs and Patents Act (1988):
* To protect intellectual property.
* Make it illegal to share copyrighted files without permission.

#### The Computer Misuse Act (1990):
* Prevents illegal access to files.
* Was introduced to stop hacking and cyber crime.

##### Added 3 new offences:
1. Gaining unauthorised access to a private network or drive, eg through hacking.
2. Gaining unauthorised access to a network or device in order to commit a crime, like stealing data or destroying the network.
3. Unauthorised modification of computer material, eg, deleting or changing files.

It also makes it illegal to make, supply or obtain malware.
