## 2.1.3 Searching and Sorting  

### Different types of searching algorithms:  

#### Bubble sort:  
* Compares pairs of items
* Sort unordered list of items.
* Easy to implement but can be slow for large lists.
* Efficient way to check if a list is in order.
* Doesn't use much memory.

__Steps:__

1. Look at the first two items in the list.
2. If they're in the right order, you don't have to do anything.
3. Move on to the next pair of items (the 2nd and 3rd entries) and repeat step 2.
4. Repeat step 3 until you get to the end of the list - this is called one "pass". The last item will now be in the correct place, so don't include it in the next pass.
5. Repeat steps 1 - 4 until there are no swaps in a pass.

#### Merge sort:
* Splits the list apart then merges it back together.
* Easier to merge 2 ordered lists than 2 unordered lists.
* More efficient than bubble and insertion sorts for large lists.
* Very consistent running time.
* Slower than others for smaller lists.
* Even if the list is sorted, it still does the whole thing.
* Uses more memory.

__Steps:__

1. Split the list in half (into sublists).
2. Keep repeating the split until each sublist only contains 1 item.
3. Merge pairs of sublists so that each one has twice as many items. Each time you merge, sort the items.
4. Repeat step 3 until you've merged all the sublists together.


#### Insertion Sort:
* Orders the items as it goes.
* Easy to code.
* Very quick to add items to the sorted list.
* Copes well with short lists.
* Doesnt require much more memory.
* Quick at checking if the list is sorted.

__Steps:__

1. Look at the second item in a list.
2. Compare it to all items before it and insert the number into the right place.
3. Repeat step 2 for all the items in the list until the last number has been inserted into the correct place.


### Searches:

#### Binary Search:
* More efficient on an ordered list than a linear search.
##### Steps:
1. Find the middle item in the ordered list.
2. If this item is the item you are looking for, then stop the search.
3. If not, compare the item you're looking for to the middle item. If it comes before the middle item, get rid of the second half of the list. If it comes after the middle item, get rid of the first half of the list.
4. List you have is now half the size of the original. Repeat steps 1-3 on this smaller list to get an even smaller one. Keep going until you find the one you are looking for.

#### Linear Search:
* Simple. Not as efficient.
* For small, unordered lists.
##### Steps:
1. Look at the first item in the unordered list.
2. If this is the item you are looking for, stop.
3. If not, then look at the next item in the list.
4. Repeat steps 2-3 until you find the item you are looking for, or you have checked every item.
